Patient Educationlisinopril oral
IMPORTANT: HOW TO USE THIS INFORMATION:  This is a summary and does NOT have all possible information about this product. This information does not assure that this product is safe, effective, or appropriate for you. This information is not individual medical advice and does not substitute for the advice of your health care professional. Always ask your health care professional for complete information about this product and your specific health needs.
LISINOPRIL SOLUTION - ORAL
(lye-SIN-oh-pril)
COMMON BRAND NAME(S): Qbrelis
WARNING:  This medication can cause serious (possibly fatal) harm to an unborn baby if used during pregnancy. It is important to prevent pregnancy while taking this medication. Consult your doctor for more details and to discuss the use of reliable forms of birth control while taking this medication. If you are planning pregnancy, become pregnant, or think you may be pregnant, tell your doctor right away.
USES:  Lisinopril is used to treat high blood pressure. Lowering high blood pressure helps prevent strokes, heart attacks, and kidney problems. It is also used to treat heart failure and to improve survival after a heart attack.
Lisinopril belongs to a class of drugs known as ACE inhibitors. It works by relaxing blood vessels so blood can flow more easily.
OTHER USES:  This section contains uses of this drug that are not listed in the approved professional labeling for the drug but that may be prescribed by your health care professional. Use this drug for a condition that is listed in this section only if it has been so prescribed by your health care professional.
This medication may also be used to help protect the kidneys from harm due to diabetes.
HOW TO USE:  Take this medication by mouth with or without food as directed by your doctor, usually once daily.
Carefully measure the dose using a special measuring device/spoon. Do not use a household spoon because you may not get the correct dose.
The dosage is based on your medical condition and response to treatment. For children, the dosage is also based on weight.
To reduce your risk of side effects, your doctor may direct you to start this medication at a low dose and gradually increase your dose. Follow your doctor's instructions carefully.
Use this medication regularly to get the most benefit from it. To help you remember, take it at the same time each day. Keep taking this medication even if you feel well. Most people with high blood pressure do not feel sick.
For the treatment of high blood pressure, it may take 2 to 4 weeks before you get the full benefit of this medication. For the treatment of heart failure, it may take weeks to months before you get the full benefit of this medication. Tell your doctor if your condition does not get better or if it gets worse (for example, your blood pressure readings remain high or increase).
SIDE EFFECTS:  Dizziness, lightheadedness, tiredness, or headache may occur as your body adjusts to the medication. Dry cough may also occur. If any of these effects last or get worse, tell your doctor or pharmacist promptly.
To reduce the risk of dizziness and lightheadedness, get up slowly when rising from a sitting or lying position.
Remember that your doctor has prescribed this medication because he or she has judged that the benefit to you is greater than the risk of side effects. Many people using this medication do not have serious side effects.
Tell your doctor right away if you have any serious side effects, including: fainting, symptoms of a high potassium blood level (such as muscle weakness, slow/irregular heartbeat).
Although lisinopril may be used to prevent kidney problems or treat people who have kidney problems, it may also rarely cause serious kidney problems or make them worse. Your doctor will check your kidney function while you are taking lisinopril. Tell your doctor right away if you have any signs of kidney problems such as a change in the amount of urine.
Lisinopril may rarely cause serious (possibly fatal) liver problems. Get medical help right away if you have any symptoms of liver damage, such as: nausea/vomiting that doesn't stop, loss of appetite, stomach/abdominal pain, yellowing eyes/skin, dark urine.
A very serious allergic reaction to this drug is rare. However, get medical help right away if you notice any symptoms of a serious allergic reaction, including: rash, itching/swelling (especially of the face/tongue/throat), severe dizziness, trouble breathing.
This is not a complete list of possible side effects. If you notice other effects not listed above, contact your doctor or pharmacist.
In the US -
Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side effects to FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or at www.fda.gov/medwatch.
In Canada - Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side effects to Health Canada at 1-866-234-2345.
PRECAUTIONS:  Before taking lisinopril, tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to it; or to other ACE inhibitors (such as benazepril); or if you have any other allergies. This product may contain inactive ingredients, which can cause allergic reactions or other problems. Talk to your pharmacist for more details.
Before using this medication, tell your doctor or pharmacist your medical history, especially of: history of an allergic reaction which included swelling of the face/lips/tongue/throat (angioedema), blood filtering procedures (such as LDL apheresis, dialysis), high level of potassium in the blood.
This drug may make you dizzy. Do not drive, use machinery, or do any activity that requires alertness until you are sure you can perform such activities safely. Limit alcoholic beverages.
Too much sweating, diarrhea, or vomiting may cause loss of too much body water (dehydration) and increase your risk of lightheadedness. Report prolonged diarrhea or vomiting to your doctor. Be sure to drink enough fluids to prevent dehydration unless your doctor directs you otherwise.
Before having surgery, tell your doctor or dentist about all the products you use (including prescription drugs, nonprescription drugs, and herbal products).
This product may increase your potassium levels. Before using potassium supplements or salt substitutes that contain potassium, consult your doctor or pharmacist.
Older adults may be more sensitive to the side effects of this drug, especially dizziness and increases in potassium level.
This medication is not recommended for use during pregnancy. It may harm an unborn baby. Consult your doctor for more details. (See also Warning section.)
It is unknown if this medication passes into breast milk. Consult your doctor before breast-feeding.
DRUG INTERACTIONS:  See also Precautions section.
Drug interactions may change how your medications work or increase your risk for serious side effects. This document does not contain all possible drug interactions. Keep a list of all the products you use (including prescription/nonprescription drugs and herbal products) and share it with your doctor and pharmacist. Do not start, stop, or change the dosage of any medicines without your doctor's approval.
Some products that may interact with this drug are: aliskiren, certain drugs that weaken the immune system/increase the risk of infection (such as everolimus, sirolimus), lithium, drugs that may increase the level of potassium in the blood (such as ARBs including losartan/valsartan, birth control pills containing drospirenone), sacubitril.
Some products have ingredients that could raise your blood pressure or worsen your heart failure. Tell your pharmacist what products you are using, and ask how to use them safely (especially cough-and-cold products, diet aids, or NSAIDs such as ibuprofen/naproxen).
A very serious reaction may occur if you are getting injections for bee/wasp sting allergy (desensitization) and are also taking lisinopril. Make sure all your doctors know which medicines you are using.
OVERDOSE:  If someone has overdosed and has serious symptoms such as passing out or trouble breathing, call 911. Otherwise, call a poison control center right away. US residents can call their local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. Canada residents can call a provincial poison control center. Symptoms of overdose may include: severe dizziness, fainting.
NOTES:  Do not share this medication with others.
Lifestyle changes that may help this medication work better include exercising, stopping smoking, and eating a low-cholesterol/low-fat diet. Consult your doctor for more details.
Lab and/or medical tests (such as kidney function, potassium levels) should be done while you are taking this medication. Keep all medical and lab appointments. Consult your doctor for more details.
Check your blood pressure and pulse (heart rate) regularly while taking this medication. Learn how to check your own blood pressure and pulse at home, and share the results with your doctor.
MISSED DOSE:  If you miss a dose, take it as soon as you remember. If it is near the time of the next dose, skip the missed dose. Take your next dose at the regular time. Do not double the dose to catch up.
STORAGE:  Store at room temperature away from light and moisture. Do not store in the bathroom. Keep all medications away from children and pets.
Do not flush medications down the toilet or pour them into a drain unless instructed to do so. Properly discard this product when it is expired or no longer needed. Consult your pharmacist or local waste disposal company.
Information last revised August 2016. Copyright(c) 2016 First Databank, Inc.