Patient Educationdutasteride oral
IMPORTANT: HOW TO USE THIS INFORMATION:  This is a summary and does NOT have all possible information about this product. This information does not assure that this product is safe, effective, or appropriate for you. This information is not individual medical advice and does not substitute for the advice of your health care professional. Always ask your health care professional for complete information about this product and your specific health needs.
DUTASTERIDE - ORAL
(due-TAST-er-ide)
COMMON BRAND NAME(S): Avodart
USES:  This medication is used in men to treat the symptoms of an enlarged prostate (benign prostatic hyperplasia-BPH). It works by reducing the size of the enlarged prostate. This helps to relieve symptoms of BPH such as difficulty in beginning the flow of urine, weak stream, and the need to urinate frequently or urgently (including during the middle of the night). It may also reduce the need for surgery to treat BPH.
Dutasteride is not approved for prevention of prostate cancer. It may slightly increase the risk of developing a very serious form of prostate cancer. Talk to your doctor about the benefits and risks.
This medication should not be used by women or children.
HOW TO USE:  Read the Patient Information Leaflet if available from your pharmacist before you start taking this medication and each time you get a refill. If you have any questions, ask your doctor or pharmacist.
Take this medication by mouth with or without food as directed by your doctor, usually once daily. Swallow the medication whole. Do not crush or chew the capsules.
Use this medication regularly to get the most benefit from it. To help you remember, take it at the same time each day.
Since this drug can be absorbed through the skin and may harm an unborn baby, women who are pregnant or who may become pregnant should not handle this medication.
It may take 3 to 6 months to notice an improvement in symptoms. Tell your doctor if your symptoms do not improve or if they worsen.
SIDE EFFECTS:  Sexual problems (such as decreased sexual interest/ability, decrease in the amount of semen/sperm), testicle pain/swelling, increased breast size, or breast tenderness may occur. Sexual problems have continued in some men even after stopping treatment. If any of these effects persist or worsen, tell your doctor or pharmacist promptly.
Remember that your doctor has prescribed this medication because he or she has judged that the benefit to you is greater than the risk of side effects. Many people using this medication do not have serious side effects.
A very serious allergic reaction to this drug is rare. However, get medical help right away if you notice any symptoms of a serious allergic reaction, including: rash, itching/swelling (especially of the face/tongue/throat), severe dizziness, trouble breathing.
This is not a complete list of possible side effects. If you notice other effects not listed above, contact your doctor or pharmacist.
In the US -
Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side effects to FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or at www.fda.gov/medwatch.
In Canada - Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side effects to Health Canada at 1-866-234-2345.
PRECAUTIONS:  Before taking dutasteride, tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to it; or to finasteride; or if you have any other allergies. This product may contain inactive ingredients, which can cause allergic reactions or other problems. Talk to your pharmacist for more details.
Before using this medication, tell your doctor or pharmacist your medical history.
Before having surgery, tell your doctor or dentist about all the products you use (including prescription drugs, nonprescription drugs, and herbal products).
Do not donate blood while you are taking this medication and for at least 6 months after you stop taking it. This will prevent the possibility of your blood being given to a pregnant woman.
This medication should not be used in women, especially during pregnancy or breast-feeding. It may harm an unborn or breast-feeding baby. Consult your doctor for more details.
DRUG INTERACTIONS:  The effects of some drugs can change if you take other drugs or herbal products at the same time. This can increase your risk for serious side effects or may cause your medications not to work correctly. These drug interactions are possible, but do not always occur. Your doctor or pharmacist can often prevent or manage interactions by changing how you use your medications or by close monitoring.
To help your doctor and pharmacist give you the best care, be sure to tell your doctor and pharmacist about all the products you use (including prescription drugs, nonprescription drugs, and herbal products) before starting treatment with this product. While using this product, do not start, stop, or change the dosage of any other medicines you are using without your doctor's approval.
Keep a list of all the products you use. Share the list with your doctor and pharmacist to reduce your risk for serious medication problems.
OVERDOSE:  If someone has overdosed and has serious symptoms such as passing out or trouble breathing, call 911. Otherwise, call a poison control center right away. US residents can call their local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. Canada residents can call a provincial poison control center.
NOTES:  Do not share this medication with others.
Laboratory and/or medical tests (such as prostate exams, prostate-specific antigen-PSA) should be performed periodically to monitor your progress or check for side effects. Consult your doctor for more details.
MISSED DOSE:  If you miss a dose, take it as soon as you remember. If it is near the time of the next dose, skip the missed dose and resume your usual dosing schedule. Do not double the dose to catch up.
STORAGE:  Store at room temperature away from light and moisture. Do not store in the bathroom. Keep all medications away from children and pets.
Dutasteride capsules may soften and leak if stored at high temperatures. If your capsules crack and leak, do not use them. If your skin comes in contact with the leaking capsules, wash the area right away with soap and water. Contact your pharmacist for more information.
Do not flush medications down the toilet or pour them into a drain unless instructed to do so. Properly discard this product when it is expired or no longer needed. Consult your pharmacist or local waste disposal company for more details about how to safely discard your product.
Information last revised July 2016. Copyright(c) 2016 First Databank, Inc.