Patient Educationcyclosporine intravenous
IMPORTANT: HOW TO USE THIS INFORMATION:  This is a summary and does NOT have all possible information about this product. This information does not assure that this product is safe, effective, or appropriate for you. This information is not individual medical advice and does not substitute for the advice of your health care professional. Always ask your health care professional for complete information about this product and your specific health needs.
CYCLOSPORINE - INTRAVENOUS
(sye-klo-SPORE-een)
COMMON BRAND NAME(S): Sandimmune
WARNING:  Cyclosporine lowers your ability to fight infections. This may make you more likely to get a serious (rarely fatal) infection or make any infection you have worse. This effect may also increase your risk of getting certain types of cancer (such as skin cancer, lymphoma). Tell your doctor right away if you have any signs of infection or cancer such as sore throat that doesn't go away, fever, chills, cough, burning/frequent urination, unusual skin changes, change in appearance or size of moles, unusual weight loss, swollen lymph glands, unusual lumps, night sweats.
Cyclosporine can also cause high blood pressure and kidney problems. The risk of both problems increases with higher doses and longer treatment with this drug. Your doctor will monitor your blood pressure and kidney function while you take this medication.
Psoriasis patients who have had certain previous treatments (such as coal tar, methotrexate, radiation treatment, light treatment with PUVA/UVB) are at increased risk to develop skin cancer. Talk to your doctor of the risks and benefits of this medication.
Different brands of this medication may deliver different amounts of medication. Do not switch brands of cyclosporine without your doctor's permission and directions.
USES:  This medication is used to prevent organ rejection in people who have received a liver, kidney, or heart transplant. It is usually used along with other medications to allow your new organ to function normally. Cyclosporine belongs to a class of drugs known as immunosuppressants. It works by slowing down your body's defense system (immune system) to prevent your body from rejecting a transplanted organ.
Because of the risk of severe allergic reactions from intravenous cyclosporine, it should be used only in patients who are unable to take cyclosporine by mouth. (See also How to Use section.) Once you are able to take medications by mouth, you should be switched from this form of cyclosporine to either the capsules or oral solution.
OTHER USES:  This section contains uses of this drug that are not listed in the approved professional labeling for the drug but that may be prescribed by your health care professional. Use this drug for a condition that is listed in this section only if it has been so prescribed by your health care professional.
This drug may also be used to prevent rejection in other types of organ transplants (e.g., cornea, pancreas) or bone marrow transplant. It may also be used to treat other conditions that may be helped by affecting the immune system (e.g., Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis).
HOW TO USE:  This medication is given into a vein as directed by your doctor, usually once daily over 2 to 6 hours. The dosage is based on your weight, medical condition, lab tests, and response to treatment. Follow the dosing schedule for this medication carefully.
If you are giving this medication to yourself at home, learn all preparation and usage instructions from your health care professional. Before using, check this product visually for particles or discoloration. If either is present, do not use the liquid. Learn how to store and discard medical supplies safely.
When cyclosporine is given into a vein, one of the other ingredients in this product, polyoxyethylated castor oil, may rarely cause a serious allergic reaction. If you are using this medication at home, be prepared to self-treat as directed by your doctor if symptoms of an allergic reaction occur. (See Side Effects section).
Use this medication regularly in order to get the most benefit from it. This medication works best when the amount of medicine in your body is kept at a constant level. Therefore, use this drug at evenly spaced intervals.
SIDE EFFECTS:  See also the Warning section.
Headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, stomach upset, acne, cramps, increased hair growth on the face/body, shaking fingers/hands (tremor), swollen/red/painful gums, and dizziness may occur. If any of these effects persist or worsen, notify your doctor or pharmacist promptly.
Remember that your doctor has prescribed this medication because he or she has judged that the benefit to you is greater than the risk of side effects. Many people using this medication do not have serious side effects.
This medication may raise your blood pressure. Check your blood pressure regularly and tell your doctor if the results are high. Your doctor may control your blood pressure with medication.
Tell your doctor right away if you have any serious side effects, including: signs of kidney problems (such as a change in the amount of urine), signs of liver disease (such as nausea/vomiting that doesn't stop, dark urine, yellowing eyes/skin, stomach/abdominal pain), easy bruising/bleeding, unusual tiredness, muscle weakness/spasms, slow/irregular heartbeat, numb/tingling skin, severe leg pain.
Get medical help right away if you have any very serious side effects, including: mental/mood changes (such as confusion, difficulty concentrating), vision changes, problems with speech, clumsiness, loss of coordination, weakness on one side of the body, chest pain, seizures.
A very serious allergic reaction to this drug is rare. However, get medical help right away if you notice any symptoms of a serious allergic reaction, including: rash, itching/swelling (especially of the face/tongue/throat), flushing, severe dizziness, trouble breathing.
This is not a complete list of possible side effects. If you notice other effects not listed above, contact your doctor or pharmacist.
In the US -
Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side effects to FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or at www.fda.gov/medwatch.
In Canada - Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side effects to Health Canada at 1-866-234-2345.
PRECAUTIONS:  Before using cyclosporine, tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to it; or if you have any other allergies. This product may contain inactive ingredients (such as polyoxyethylated castor oil), which can cause allergic reactions or other problems. Talk to your pharmacist for more details.
Before using this medication, tell your doctor or pharmacist your medical history, especially of: kidney disease, liver disease, high blood pressure, cancer, skin lesions of unknown cause, radiation treatment (including light treatment with PUVA or UVB), mineral imbalance (such as low level of magnesium or high level of potassium), recent/current infections, high cholesterol/triglycerides levels.
This drug may make you dizzy. Do not drive, use machinery, or do any activity that requires alertness until you are sure you can perform such activities safely. Limit alcoholic beverages.
Cyclosporine can make you more likely to get infections or may worsen any current infections. Therefore, wash your hands well to prevent the spread of infection. Avoid contact with people who have infections that may spread to others (such as chickenpox, measles, flu). Consult your doctor if you have been exposed to an infection or for more details.
Do not have immunizations/vaccinations without the consent of your doctor. Avoid contact with people who have recently received live vaccines (such as flu vaccine inhaled through the nose).
This drug may increase your risk for developing skin cancer. Avoid prolonged sun exposure, tanning booths and sunlamps. Use a sunscreen and wear protective clothing when outdoors.
This product may increase your potassium levels. Before using potassium supplements or salt substitutes that contain potassium, consult your doctor or pharmacist.
This medication may cause swelling and growth of the gums (gingival hyperplasia). Brush your teeth and floss daily to minimize this problem. See your dentist regularly.
This medication may contain alcohol. Caution is advised if you have liver disease, alcohol dependence, seizures, or any other condition that require you to limit/avoid alcohol in your diet. Caution is also advised if you are pregnant or breast-feeding. Carefully watch children while they use this medication. Ask your doctor or pharmacist about using this product safely.
Before having surgery, tell your doctor or dentist about all the products you use (including prescription drugs, nonprescription drugs, and herbal products).
The elderly may be at greater risk for the effects on blood pressure and kidneys while using this drug.
This medication should be used only when clearly needed during pregnancy. Cyclosporine used during pregnancy has resulted in newborns with problems such as low birth weight and being born too early (premature). Other more serious problems have also been reported, including death of the unborn baby. Discuss the risks and benefits with your doctor.
This medication passes into breast milk. Because of the possible risk to the infant, breast-feeding while using this drug is not recommended. Consult your doctor before breast-feeding.
DRUG INTERACTIONS:  See also the How to Use section.
Drug interactions may change how your medications work or increase your risk for serious side effects. This document does not contain all possible drug interactions. Keep a list of all the products you use (including prescription/nonprescription drugs and herbal products) and share it with your doctor and pharmacist. Do not start, stop, or change the dosage of any medicines without your doctor's approval.
Some products that may interact with this drug include: coal tar, orlistat, other drugs that weaken the immune system/increase the risk of infection (such as natalizumab, rituximab, tofacitinib), drugs that may increase potassium levels (such as potassium supplements, certain diuretics/"water pills" including amiloride, spironolactone), tacrolimus.
Other medications can affect the removal of cyclosporine from your body, which may affect how cyclosporine works. Examples include boceprevir, bosentan, mifepristone, St. John's wort, telaprevir, among others.
This medication can slow down the removal of other medications from your body, which may affect how they work. Examples of affected drugs include aliskiren, dabigatran, dronedarone, certain statins (such as pitavastatin, simvastatin), among others.
OVERDOSE:  If someone has overdosed and has serious symptoms such as passing out or trouble breathing, call 911. Otherwise, call a poison control center right away. US residents can call their local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. Canada residents can call a provincial poison control center.
NOTES:  Keep all laboratory and medical appointments. Laboratory and/or medical tests (e.g., liver and kidney function, blood pressure, blood mineral levels, uric acid, cyclosporine blood levels) should be performed from time to time to monitor your progress or check for side effects. Consult your doctor for more details.
If you have had an organ transplant, it is recommended that you attend a transplant education class or support group. Learn the symptoms of organ rejection such as a feeling of being ill, fever, pain around the transplanted organ, and signs of a failing transplanted organ (a decrease in the amount of urine with kidney transplant, yellowing of the skin/eyes with liver transplant, shortness of breath/inability to exercise with heart transplant). Seek immediate medical attention if these symptoms of rejection occur.
MISSED DOSE:  For the best possible benefit, it is important to receive each scheduled dose of this medication as directed. If you miss a dose, contact your doctor or pharmacist right away to establish a new dosing schedule. Do not double the dose to catch up.
STORAGE:  Consult the product instructions and your pharmacist for storage details. Keep all medications away from children and pets.
Do not flush medications down the toilet or pour them into a drain unless instructed to do so. Properly discard this product when it is expired or no longer needed. Consult your pharmacist or local waste disposal company.
MEDICAL ALERT:  Your condition can cause complications in a medical emergency. For information about enrolling in MedicAlert, call 1-888-633-4298 (US) or 1-800-668-1507 (Canada).
Information last revised July 2016. Copyright(c) 2016 First Databank, Inc.