Patient Educationfurosemide injection
IMPORTANT: HOW TO USE THIS INFORMATION:  This is a summary and does NOT have all possible information about this product. This information does not assure that this product is safe, effective, or appropriate for you. This information is not individual medical advice and does not substitute for the advice of your health care professional. Always ask your health care professional for complete information about this product and your specific health needs.
FUROSEMIDE - INJECTION
(fure-OH-se-mide)
COMMON BRAND NAME(S): Lasix
USES:  This medication is known as a diuretic (like a "water pill"). It helps your body get rid of extra water by increasing the amount of urine you make. Getting rid of extra water decreases the strain on your heart and blood vessels, thereby lowering high blood pressure and reducing your risk of strokes, heart attacks, and kidney problems. This effect can also improve symptoms such as trouble breathing and swelling (edema). This injectable form of furosemide is used when the drug cannot be taken by mouth, especially in patients with severe medical conditions.
OTHER USES:  This section contains uses of this drug that are not listed in the approved professional labeling for the drug but that may be prescribed by your health care professional. Use this drug for a condition that is listed in this section only if it has been so prescribed by your health care professional.
This medication can also be used to decrease calcium in the blood (hypercalcemia).
HOW TO USE:  This medication is given by injection into a muscle or slowly into a vein as directed by your doctor. The dosage is based on your age, medical condition, and response to treatment. In children, the dosage is also based on weight.
If you are giving this medication to yourself at home, learn all preparation and usage instructions from your health care professional. Before using, check this product visually for particles or discoloration. If either is present, do not use the liquid. Learn how to store and discard medical supplies safely.
Tell your doctor if your condition persists or worsens.
SIDE EFFECTS:  Dizziness, lightheadedness, headache, blurred vision, loss of appetite, stomach upset, diarrhea, or constipation may occur. If any of these effects persist or worsen, notify your doctor or pharmacist promptly.
Remember that your doctor has prescribed this medication because he or she has judged that the benefit to you is greater than the risk of side effects. Many people using this medication do not have serious side effects.
This medication may lead to a loss of too much body water and minerals (dehydration). Tell your doctor right away if you have any of these unlikely but serious symptoms: muscle cramps, weakness, confusion, severe dizziness, drowsiness, unusual dry mouth, unusual increased thirst, nausea/vomiting, fast/irregular heartbeat, fainting, seizures.
Tell your doctor right away if you have any serious side effects, including: signs of kidney problems (such as change in the amount of urine), easy bleeding/bruising, hearing loss, ringing in the ears, numbness/tingling of the arms/legs, stomach/abdominal pain, yellowing eyes/skin.
A very serious allergic reaction to this drug is rare. However, get medical help right away if you notice any symptoms of a serious allergic reaction, including: rash, itching/swelling (especially of the face/tongue/throat), severe dizziness, trouble breathing.
This is not a complete list of possible side effects. If you notice other effects not listed above, contact your doctor or pharmacist.
In the US -
Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side effects to FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or at www.fda.gov/medwatch.
In Canada - Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side effects to Health Canada at 1-866-234-2345.
PRECAUTIONS:  Before using furosemide, tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to it; or if you have any other allergies. This product may contain inactive ingredients, which can cause allergic reactions or other problems. Talk to your pharmacist for more details.
Before using this medication, tell your doctor or pharmacist your medical history, especially of: kidney disease, liver disease, gout, lupus.
If you have diabetes, furosemide may make it harder to control your blood sugar levels. Monitor your blood sugar levels regularly and inform your doctor of the results.
This drug may reduce the potassium levels in your blood. Ask your doctor about adding potassium to your diet. A potassium supplement may be prescribed by your doctor.
This medication may make you more sensitive to the sun. Avoid prolonged sun exposure, tanning booths, and sunlamps. Use a sunscreen and wear protective clothing when outdoors.
Before having surgery, tell your doctor or dentist that you are taking this medication.
This drug may make you dizzy or drowsy or cause blurred vision. Do not drive, use machinery, or do any activity that requires alertness or clear vision until you are sure you can perform such activities safely. Limit alcoholic beverages.
To minimize dizziness and lightheadedness, get up slowly when rising from a sitting or lying position.
Babies born early (premature infants) and children may be more sensitive to certain effects of this drug, such as kidney stones.
Caution is advised when using this drug in the elderly because they may be more sensitive to its effects, especially dizziness.
Furosemide should be used only when clearly needed during pregnancy. Discuss the risks and benefits with your doctor.
This drug passes into breast milk and may affect milk production. Consult your doctor before breast-feeding.
DRUG INTERACTIONS:  Drug interactions may change how your medications work or increase your risk for serious side effects. This document does not contain all possible drug interactions. Keep a list of all the products you use (including prescription/nonprescription drugs and herbal products) and share it with your doctor and pharmacist. Do not start, stop, or change the dosage of any medicines without your doctor's approval.
Some products that may interact with this drug include: aliskiren, cisplatin, cisapride, digoxin, ethacrynic acid, lithium.
Check the labels on all your medicines (such as cough-and-cold products, diet aids, or NSAIDs such as ibuprofen, naproxen) because they may contain ingredients that could increase your blood pressure or swelling (edema). Ask your pharmacist for more details.
OVERDOSE:  If someone has overdosed and has serious symptoms such as passing out or trouble breathing, call 911. Otherwise, call a poison control center right away. US residents can call their local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. Canada residents can call a provincial poison control center. Symptoms of overdose may include: a severe decrease in amount of urine, weakness, fast/irregular heartbeat.
NOTES:  Do not share this medication with others.
Laboratory and/or medical tests (e.g., kidney function tests, blood mineral levels such as sodium/potassium) should be performed periodically to monitor your progress or check for side effects. Consult your doctor for more details.
MISSED DOSE:  If you miss a dose, use it as soon as you remember. If it is near the time of the next dose, skip the missed dose and resume your usual dosing schedule. Do not double the dose to catch up.
STORAGE:  Consult the product instructions and your pharmacist for storage details. Keep all medications away from children and pets.
Do not flush medications down the toilet or pour them into a drain unless instructed to do so. Properly discard this product when it is expired or no longer needed. Consult your pharmacist or local waste disposal company.
Information last revised July 2016. Copyright(c) 2016 First Databank, Inc.