Patient Educationceftriaxone intravenous
IMPORTANT: HOW TO USE THIS INFORMATION:  This is a summary and does NOT have all possible information about this product. This information does not assure that this product is safe, effective, or appropriate for you. This information is not individual medical advice and does not substitute for the advice of your health care professional. Always ask your health care professional for complete information about this product and your specific health needs.
CEFTRIAXONE - INJECTION
(SEF-trye-AX-one)
COMMON BRAND NAME(S): Rocephin
USES:  Ceftriaxone is used to treat a wide variety of bacterial infections. This medication belongs to a class of drugs known as cephalosporin antibiotics. It works by stopping the growth of bacteria.
This drug is not recommended for use in newborns with high blood bilirubin levels and premature infants due to increased risk of side effects. Ask the doctor or pharmacist for details.
OTHER USES:  This section contains uses of this drug that are not listed in the approved professional labeling for the drug but that may be prescribed by your health care professional. Use this drug for a condition that is listed in this section only if it has been so prescribed by your health care professional.
This drug may also be used before dental procedures in people with certain heart conditions (such as artificial heart valves) to help prevent serious infection of the heart (bacterial endocarditis).
HOW TO USE:  This medication is given by injection into a muscle or vein as directed by your doctor, usually once or twice daily. The dosage is based on your medical condition and response to treatment. Drink plenty of fluids while using this medication unless your doctor directs you otherwise.
If you are using this medication at home, learn all preparation and usage instructions from your health care professional. Avoid mixing ceftriaxone with IV fluids that have calcium in them (such as Ringer's solution, Hartmann's solution, parenteral nutrition-TPN/PPN). Consult your pharmacist for details about the safe use of IV calcium products in infants, children, and adults (see Precautions section). Before using, check this product visually for particles or discoloration. If either is present, do not use the liquid. Learn how to store and discard medical supplies safely.
If you are using the frozen pre-mixed solution, thaw the bag at room temperature or in the refrigerator. If the bag is thawed in the refrigerator, let it sit at room temperature at least 1 hour before using. Do not thaw by putting in a water bath or microwaving. After thawing, shake well and squeeze the bag to check for leaks. Discard solution if the bag leaks. Do not re-freeze the solution after thawing.
Antibiotics work best when the amount of medicine in your body is kept at a constant level. Use this drug at evenly spaced intervals.
Continue to use this medication for the full time prescribed, even if symptoms disappear after a few days. Stopping the medication too early may result in a return of the infection.
Tell your doctor if your condition lasts or gets worse.
SIDE EFFECTS:  Swelling, redness, or pain at the injection site may occur. If any of these effects last or get worse, tell your doctor or pharmacist promptly.
Remember that your doctor has prescribed this medication because he or she has judged that the benefit to you is greater than the risk of side effects. Many people using this medication do not have serious side effects.
Tell your doctor right away if you have any serious side effects, including: easy bruising/bleeding, unusual tiredness, symptoms of gallbladder disease (such as stomach/abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting), signs of kidney problems (such as change in the amount of urine), pink/bloody/dark urine, painful/frequent urination, back/side pain, yellowing eyes/skin, uncontrollable movements, mental/mood changes (such as confusion), seizures.
This medication may rarely cause a severe intestinal condition (Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea) due to a type of resistant bacteria. This condition may occur during treatment or weeks to months after treatment has stopped. Tell your doctor right away if you develop: diarrhea that doesn't stop, abdominal or stomach pain/cramping, blood/mucus in your stool.
Do not use anti-diarrhea products or narcotic pain medications if you have any of these symptoms because these products may make them worse.
Use of this medication for prolonged or repeated periods may result in oral thrush or a new yeast infection. Contact your doctor if you notice white patches in your mouth, a change in vaginal discharge, or other new symptoms.
A very serious allergic reaction to this drug is rare. However, get medical help right away if you notice any symptoms of a serious allergic reaction, including: rash, itching/swelling (especially of the face/tongue/throat), severe dizziness, trouble breathing.
This is not a complete list of possible side effects. If you notice other effects not listed above, contact your doctor or pharmacist.
In the US -
Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side effects to FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or at www.fda.gov/medwatch.
In Canada - Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side effects to Health Canada at 1-866-234-2345.
PRECAUTIONS:  Before using ceftriaxone, tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to it; or to other antibiotics (such as penicillins, other cephalosporins); or if you have any other allergies. This product may contain inactive ingredients, which can cause allergic reactions or other problems. Talk to your pharmacist for more details.
Before using this medication, tell your doctor or pharmacist your medical history, especially of: gallbladder disease, kidney disease, liver disease, stomach/intestinal diseases (such as colitis).
Do not give any products by vein that contain calcium (including IV solutions such as Ringer's solution, Hartmann's solution, parenteral nutrition-TPN/PPN) to a newborn less than 1 month old who is receiving this medication. Doing so can cause serious problems in the vital organs.
Ceftriaxone may cause live bacterial vaccines (such as typhoid vaccine) not to work as well. Do not have any immunizations/vaccinations while using this medication without the consent of your doctor.
Before having surgery, tell your doctor or dentist about all the products you use (including prescription drugs, nonprescription drugs, and herbal products).
Tell your doctor if you are pregnant before using this medication.
This medication passes into breast milk in small amounts and is unlikely to harm a nursing infant. Consult your doctor before breast-feeding.
DRUG INTERACTIONS:  Drug interactions may change how your medications work or increase your risk for serious side effects. This document does not contain all possible drug interactions. Keep a list of all the products you use (including prescription/nonprescription drugs and herbal products) and share it with your doctor and pharmacist. Do not start, stop, or change the dosage of any medicines without your doctor's approval.
Some products that may interact with this drug include: calcium-containing IV fluids.
Although most antibiotics are unlikely to affect hormonal birth control such as pills, patch, or ring, a few antibiotics (such as rifampin, rifabutin) can decrease their effectiveness. This could result in pregnancy. If you use hormonal birth control, ask your doctor or pharmacist for more details.
This medication may interfere with certain lab tests (such as certain urine glucose tests), possibly causing false test results. Make sure lab personnel and all your doctors know you use this drug.
OVERDOSE:  If someone has overdosed and has serious symptoms such as passing out or trouble breathing, call 911. Otherwise, call a poison control center right away. US residents can call their local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. Canada residents can call a provincial poison control center. Symptoms of overdose may include: seizures.
NOTES:  Do not share this medication with others.
Lab and/or medical tests (such as complete blood count, kidney function tests) should be done while you are using this medication. Keep all medical and lab appointments.
MISSED DOSE:  For the best possible benefit, it is important to receive each scheduled dose of this medication as directed. If you miss a dose, contact your doctor or pharmacist right away to establish a new dosing schedule. Do not double the dose to catch up.
STORAGE:  Consult the product instructions and your pharmacist for storage details. Keep all medications away from children and pets.
Do not flush medications down the toilet or pour them into a drain unless instructed to do so. Properly discard this product when it is expired or no longer needed. Consult your pharmacist or local waste disposal company.
Information last revised July 2016. Copyright(c) 2016 First Databank, Inc.